draft of sync threat model (#176)
aranya-project/aranya-docs: docs/sync-threat-model.md

## Terminology

 - **Graph:** Sometimes called a "Team" or "DAG", a graph is a set of commands in an Aranya protocol. The set of commands is structured as a Directed Acyclic Graph.
 - **Commands:** Nodes in the graph are serialized messages and referred to as commands. Each command that is not a merge command is cryptographically signed by the device that authored it. All edges in the graph are cryptographic hashes of a preceding command referred to as the Parent. Merge commands are unsigned and have exactly two parents. The initial command has no parents. All other commands have exactly one parent. The hash of a command, including the command's signature, is the CommandId for the command.
 - **Device:** A device is an instance of the Aranya daemon with a unique set of device keys.

>  - **DeviceId:** The cryptographic hash of a public key used by a device to sign the it's key bundle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - **DeviceId:** The cryptographic hash of the device's public identity key.
```
The way this was worded made it sound like the hash is used for signing. And the signing key for signing is different from the identity key used for the DeviceId. I believe the DeviceId is the hash of the public identity key.

If an adversary were able to confuse a device about which other device or devices it was communicating with, this could cause the propagation of state in the network to be delayed or blocked.

### Threats

The primary threats to device identity and addressing involve an adversary attempting to forge or misrepresent a DeviceId, with the goal of disrupting the association between addresses and identities.

> **Threat DA-1: DeviceId Spoofing.** An adversary claims to control a DeviceId for which they do not hold the private keys, causing a legitimate device to believe it is syncing with a specific peer when it is not.

> **Threat DA-2: Man-in-the-Middle on Discovery.** During DeviceId discovery (when a device knows an address but not the DeviceId), an attacker intercepts the challenge-response protocol and forwards the challenge to a different address, attempting to bind their address to another device's identity.

> **Threat DA-3: DeviceId discovery.** If DeviceID discovery is not encrypted and authenticated and advisory can observe or preform oracle attacks to discover the identities of the devices in the team.

### DeviceId Discovery

> In some cases we may know the address of a device but not its DeviceId. This case currently occurs during demos and tests where containers are configured prior to the devices generating their keys and DeviceIds It may also be useful in operational environments where devices are deployed before their identities are known. In this case we use a challenge-response protocol to establish the DeviceId associated with an address:

Author: No it is only used for discovering the DeviceId for a device you only know the Address for. It is part of the larger sync system not mTLS spisifically.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    Challenger->>Responder: Challenge(Nonce, Address)
    Responder->>Challenger: Response(Nonce, Address, PubKey, Signature)
```

> The Challenger generates a random Nonce and sends it along with the Responder's Address. The Responder verifies that the Address matches its own, then signs the complete response (Nonce, Address, and PubKey) with its device key. The Challenger verifies the signature using the included PubKey, then derives the DeviceId by hashing the PubKey.

Reviewer: Worth clarifying whether the nonce in the response is the same one sent by the challenger or generated by the responder.

> **Claim DA-C1:** If the responder only responds to challenges matching their address, only the holder of the private key associated with a DeviceId can successfully produce a valid response for an address. *Mitigates: DA-1, DA-2*

 If discovery runs in the clear, an eavesdropper can learn which DeviceIds map to which network addresses. This is not graph content, but it is metadata that could aid targeted denial of service or traffic analysis. To mitigate this DeviceId discovery must be run over QUIC connections using mTLS and sync group certs.

### Requirements

#### ADDR-001

Devices MUST only accept DeviceId discovery responses where the Address in the response matches the address to which the challenge was sent.

*Mitigates: DA-2*

#### ADDR-002

Devices MUST verify the cryptographic signature on DeviceId discovery responses using the public key included in the response, and MUST derive the DeviceId by hashing that public key.

*Mitigates: DA-1*

#### ADDR-003

> DeviceId discovery must only be preformed over connections that are encrypted and authenticated, ensuring that both parties are members of the sync group.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
DeviceId discovery must only be performed over connections that are encrypted and authenticated, ensuring that both parties are members of the sync group.
```

#### DOS-004

A responder MUST NOT send commands in a SyncResponse that are present in the requester's sample or that are ancestors of commands in the sample.

*Correctness requirement for well-behaved responders.*

#### DOS-005

A responder MUST send commands in topological order such that a command's parents are always sent before the command itself.

*Correctness requirement for well-behaved responders.*

#### DOS-006

A requester SHOULD apply a backoff strategy to SyncRequests sent to a device that has sent commands excluded by the sample or commands out of topological order. Repeated violations SHOULD result in increasing delays before further SyncRequests are sent to that device.

*Mitigates: DOS-3 (DOS-004 and DOS-005 define correct responder behavior, but a malicious responder will violate them; this requirement is the actual defense on the requester side.)*

### Connection Limiting

> **Threat DOS-4: Connection Exhaustion.** A malicious authorized device opens many QUIC connections (or holds connections open indefinitely) to exhaust connection-tracking state or file descriptor limits on the target device.

> To prevent connection exhaustion, devices should limit QUIC connections to one per certificate. Since mTLS provides the certificate identity at connection time, this can be enforced before any sync messages are processed.

Reviewer: One connection per peer certificate. A single device with a cert may have multiple connections with different peers.
```suggestion
To prevent connection exhaustion, devices should limit QUIC connections to one per peer certificate. Since mTLS provides the certificate identity at connection time, this can be enforced before any sync messages are processed.
```
